I'm currently going over three years of undergrad maths topics. They range from topics I'm very happy with, such as number theory and real analysis, to areas like differential geometry and representation theory of which I have basically no recollection. The stated goal of formal mathematical education is to foster an understanding of mathematical knowledge. But what does it mean to understand a mathematical concept? Why do we care about understanding? How do you go about attaining understanding? (I'm not discussing research skill here, just comprehension of previously developed areas of maths).

## What is (mathematical) understanding?

The current fundamental unit of mathematical knowledge is the theorem. Theorems and their proofs are the main constituents of lectures, papers and talks. The implicitly assumed route to learning an area of maths goes something like this: first you see some definitions, and some examples of these definitions (both expressed in terms of concepts you've already seen). Then you see some consequences of these definitions, phrased as theorems. Then you (often) see the proofs of these theorems. At what point has the goal of understanding been achieved?

**Attempted definition 1: you understand a theorem if you are able, when asked, to define the objects it concerns, and to provide a proof**. This is the sort of understanding that a learn-by-rote exam tests. But there are big problems with this definition. This criterion is satisfied by, say, a short script that regurtitates a proof when triggered with a theorem keyword.

The history of artificial intelligence suggests that at one point, this *would* have been under consideration as a form of understanding, especially if multiple keywords pointed to the same file. It's now pretty clear that there some properties of our everyday notion of comprehension that are clearly not satisfied by a script like this, namely *robustness, applicability, and connectedness*. This understanding is *not robust*- changing a single bit would ruin the interpretation of the proof. Heavy-drinking mathematicians illustrate that humans can edit swathes of their mental architecture without harming their understanding of a theorem. In a similar vein, this understanding isn't *applicable*: without much more machinery, this script couldn't make head or tail of a linear algebra problem. The reason that 'learned' concepts aren't applicable is that they *aren't connected*: whereas the program is isolated, a human messily associates mathematical concepts with previous notions like spatial intuitions. Indeed, the current consensus in AI is that distributed embeddings of concepts are preferable to these 'symbolic' representations. 

Returning to humans, we can reflect on the experiences that accompany these different forms of understanding. If you can only regurtitate definitions and a proof, you most likely have to piece together a proof, constantly searching for clues as to what comes next. You struggle to come up with metaphors or sensations to accompany your manipulations. The way you remember the proof is probably heavily reliant on the notation and context in which you first learnt it. In contrast, a human connected understanding is probably notation-independent, or else uses imprecise words as cues for non-verbal understanding. You can 'see' what the claim means, and how it relates to your gut-level models of the concepts involved. The understanding is probably robust to changes in, say, the order in which concepts are defined, and easily spotted to be applicable in a reframed or disguised context. Most people would agree that this second notion is much closer to what we want to mean by the word 'understand'. 

**Attempted definition 2: you understand a theorem if you have gut-level/non-verbal intuitions for the concepts involved, and you can directly see why the theorem holds**. A canonical example of such understanding might be a simple geometric visualisation for an algebraic identity involving the integers.

This seems strong enough. But if we want to use this definition, we would have to accept that lots of true modern maths is not understood by any living human. With human levels of memory and intelligence, long proofs are simply not compressible into a subjective single flash of comprehension. Tim Gowers has written that an 'obvious' statement is one whose proof instantly springs to mind. So taking this definition of understanding, we would require that you can only understand obvious things! A suprising number of results are obvious from the right perspective, but not all of them. At the extreme end, it is presently impossible for a mathematician to directly see something like the classification of finite simple groups. Given that we want a practical litmus test for learning maths, this definition is probably too strong. 

A physical analogy is helpful here. The trajectory of a thrown ball is an involved consequence of the laws of motion. Most people don't see *why* an object will fall in a certain place, they see *that* an object will fall in a certain place. And they are correct. They have an 'inner simulator', or reliable and correct intuitions about the way physical objects behave. Likewise, I'm guessing that for most mathematicians, when reaching for a well-used theorem, they can instantly feel its truth, without necessarily having a proof at their fingertips.  

**Attempted definition 3: You understand mathematical concepts to the extent that the things that seem true about your gut-level models correspond precisely to true statements about the concepts**

This is the first attempted definition that doesn't use the words 'theorem' or 'proof'. Rather than focussing on delimiting an area of maths into a linear succession of provable results, understanding requires experience and fluency with the underlying concepts. I conjecture that this form of understanding is much more important when solving exercises or problems in a field.

## How does one attain mathematical understanding?

The practical question of how best to rapidly attain mathematical understanding is more pressing for me at the moment. Taking the above definition as gospel, it looks like I want to do something like train an inner simulator with the available corpus of examples and statements, tying them to useful (probably spatial/sensory) intuitions.

It looks like there are two steps here: building the corpus, and then training my intuition. As far as building the corpus goes, I'll  want to make sure my set of examples is broad enough. For example, it would be easy to train my intuition into believing that every field has characteristic 0, or that every number field is a UFD. With this in mind, I should gather a cluster of examples, results, and fuzzy intuitions for each concept area I want to cover. Continuing the number field example, this should include specific examples of number fields that cover most variations in behaviour, results that hold for all number fields, and intuitive rephrasings of these results that are palatable to my inner simulator. I'm going to call the corpus an 'intuition cluster' for now.

I'm envisaging the training process looking a lot like active recall learning. I should be presented with a definition, loosely phrased concept, or label for an area of maths, and attempt to produce examples, intuitions, and true statements about the area. Initially it'll be a combination of memory work (remembering what is true) as well as intuition work (checking what feels true), but the distinction between these should blur as time passes. I'll then compare against my previously assimmilated 'intuition cluster', to look for both true things that I haven't produced, as well as false things that I have. Spaced repetition seems like a natural framework for this recall process.

I'll attempt to produce intuition clusters for Representation Theory and Galois Theory over the next week, and I'll post them as I go. I also expect my strategy for quickly attaining understanding to evolve over time. Update: first attempt at intuition clusters for rep theory are [here](https://hilbert-spaess.github.io/2020/03/21/maths-Rep-theory-intuition-clusters.html).

## What's the role of proof?

The traditional wisdom appears to be that studying and learning proofs is a vital component of a mathematical education. I'll give three reasons for studying proofs: two that don't seem relevant for what I've labelled 'understanding', and one that does.

**Reason 1**: (Relevant if you want to do research) Seeing proofs is important for learning how to prove things. If my goal is to prove new theorems, rather than understand previously developed areas of maths, then I should be training to produce my own valid proofs.

**Reason 2**: (Relevant if you have trust issues) Seeing proofs is important for believing the statements. There's a sense of satisfaction that comes from knowing that you don't have to defer to the mathematical authorities that be, but can instead rely on the logical capacity of your past self. For sufficiently trippy areas like model theory, I basically need to work through a proof to calm down. 

**Reason 3**: (relevant) Proofs are a useful of source of intuitions, examples and perspectives on existing theorems. Often the key idea in a proof of a theorem reflects a truth that is not obvious from the statement of a theorem, but that would be a useful component of an intuition cluster.

Of course, if like me you've made the short-sighted move of enrolling in a formal higher education, there's a fourth, critical exam-related imperative to learn proofs.
