---
title: Confessions of a recovering Platonist
layout: post
---

<script type="text/x-mathjax-config"> MathJax.Hub.Config({ tex2jax: { inlineMath: [['$','$'], ['\\(','\\)']], processEscapes: true } }); </script> <script src="https://cdnjs.cloudflare.com/ajax/libs/mathjax/2.7.0/MathJax.js?config=TeX-AMS-MML_HTMLorMML" type="text/javascript"></script>

Disclaimer: I haven't thought long enough about the philosophical questions to be very confident that what I'm saying isn't nonsense. If you think what I've written here is nonsense, please let me know. 

## Platonists and formalists

A lot of conversations between people studying maths concern the set of natural numbers, $\mathbb{N}$. I'll assume that anyone reading this has been part of such a conversation. And many of these conversations involve claims that could be formalised as a sentence in a first-order language like the language of PA, and concern the truth-value of these claims. I will say that someeone is **a Platonist with respect to the naturals** if they believe that every such sentence has a definite truth value when interpreted as referring to $\mathbb{N}$. Even if they don't know whether a sentence is true or false, they have the unshakable conviction that it must be one or the other, and they know this because they have access to a specific, true, model of the language of PA. By contrast, I'll say that someone is a **formalist w.r.t. the naturals** if they are only happy to talk about whether a sentence follows from a particular set of axioms, usually the standard axioms of arithmetic. This post is a summary of my opinions on whether it makes sense to be a Platonist w.r.t. $\mathbb{N}$, and more importantly, w.r.t. $\mathbb{R}$.   

I'm pretty confident that most working mathematicians are Platonists. This is based on three years of one-on-one interactions with PhD students and researchers in pure maths. I remember reading a quote to the effect that mathematicians are Platonists on weekdays, and formalists at the weekend. There is a day-to-day conviction that numbers exist, and that the work of number theorists lies in exposing the truths about these numbers. If under assault, most work could be reduced to deductions in some formal system, and all talk of $\mathbb{N}$ could be demoted to the role of an abbrevation for this formality, rather than literal truth. But no mathematician I've encountered so far has seriously doubted the existence of a specific object $\mathbb{N}$.

I find this a bit scary. A generous commentary would be that the ubiquity of this attitude deserves more widespread attention. You could easily go further and describe it as worryingly cult-like. 

## The natural numbers

The first time I realised that there was even a question to be answered here was when studying the [incompleteness theorems](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/GoedelsFirstIncompletenessTheorem.html). In particular, the first theorem states that any formal system strong enough to contain PA must contain an undecidable sentence. This can be (and often is) more provocatively phrased to say that there exists a true, unprovable statement. I was confused about the meaning of "true" in this sentence, so I asked a lecturer. The straightforward response was that a statement about numbers was "true" if it held in $\mathbb{N}$. This, apparently, was a lecturer who was a Platonist on Sundays too- for once, this reference to $\mathbb{N}$ couldn't be rolled back to innocent formalism, but was admission of direct access to the true natural numbers. (To clarify, Godel's theorem can of course be fully formalised in a system like ZFC. It is only the lecturer's reference to the unambiguous truth-value of an arbitrary sentence that defies formalisation).

The problem with unquestioned Platonism is that it's really quite a remarkable position to hold. Friends without experience in maths, but with much better practical epistemology skills than me, find the existence of $\mathbb{N}$ to be far from obvious. Both Roger Penrose and David Deutsch have really interesting things to say about this question. I've got a few disorganised thoughts about it. To cut to the chase, I'm undecided about whether $\mathbb{N}$ exists or not, but I'm fairly confident that it doesn't make sense to be a Platonist with respect to $\mathbb{R}$.

Thus far, I've ducked out of giving an actual definition of Platonic existence, defining my terms by instead classifying people by what they're likely to say about numbers. How, concretely, would the world look different if $\mathbb{N}$ existed, and mathematicians had so-called direct access to it? For one, we wouldn't expect to arrive at contradictory statements via intuitively acceptable reasoning- we wouldn't expect to find contradictory statements that could plausibly hold in the 'one true model'. So far, this has never happened. But I don't see any reason that it might not happen. Could it not be the case that modern mathematicians are only exploring the shallows of the language of arithmetic, some unrepresentatively unambiguous region? At the moment, it seems to me that any defense of the Platonic conception of $\mathbb{N}$ must ultimately be rooted in intuition, bordering on the theological. I would like to be able to discard the naturals as superstition, were it not for the fact that I feel the intuition particularly strongly. I'll leave the question of the source of this intuition to another post, and turn to the more straightforward case of the reals. 

## The real numbers

In much the same way that I was taught about $\mathbb{N}$ at university, the set of real numbers $\mathbb{R}$ played a recurring role. A Platonic conception of $\mathbb{R}$ seems much less defensible than that of $\mathbb{N}$. I can recall a sense of foreboding and confusion about casually manipulating $\mathbb{R}$ as an object, a sense that was drummed out of me pseudo-religiously. So to glibly talk about direct intuition here seems facetious. The continuum as a set is a miraculous construction, but quite likely to be an illusion. (To reiterate, I know nothing of my lecturer's attitudes about the 'true' $\mathbb{R}$. All results they taught hold as theorems in ZFC, as results about objects with the properties of $\mathbb{R}$. However, I for one was fooled into conviction as to the existence of a sole, true set object $\mathbb{R}$, with rigid properties, and I doubt I was alone).

In fact, with an understanding of [forcing](https://hilbert-spaess.github.io/forcing.html), I think we can produce an argument illustrating the difficulties with a 'true' $\mathbb{R}$. I claim that you can't have all three of the following: a true set of naturals $\mathbb{N}$, a true powerset of the naturals $\mathcal{P}(\mathbb{N})$ (equivalent to the reals), and a universe of set theory $V$ containing the previous two sets as its own copy of $\omega$ and $\mathcal{P}(\omega)$ respectively. Indeed, suppose we had such a set-theoretic universe $V$. Then, appealing to the [naturalistic account of forcing](https://hilbert-spaess.github.io/2020/05/24/forcing-frameworks.html), we can pass to a new model $V[G]$, with the same $\omega$, and containing an additional element $G$ that entails a new element of $\mathcal{P}(\omega)$. In particular, our previous notion of $\mathcal{P}(\omega)$ was **missing** an element. I don't know about you, but if I had my very own Platonic powerset of the naturals, it wouldn't be missing any subsets.

It could be argued that the weak link here is ZFC, but I don't know much about any other candidate formalisations of $\mathbb{R}$. And if we can't even find an adequate formalisation, the argument for the existence of $\mathbb{R}$ rests entirely on my already flimsy conception of a collection containing the real numbers.

## A conclusion

The fellow at Cambridge who most embodied the spirit of enlightened and generous Platonism was Imre Leader. Writing this sort of post feels almost heretical when I remember his talks and lectures. Where the vivid shared intuition for the reality of the set of natural numbers comes from remains a beautiful mystery. But heralding the existence of objects like $\mathbb{R}$ is pretty hard to justify, and could even be considered a form of indoctrination. 

